

# Childhood Vaccination Exemptions in the United States (2019–2024)

## Author

Alexandrine Bilwes Crane  
Cornell University

## Contact

ac292@cornell.edu  

## Overview

This project examines trends in childhood vaccination exemptions in the United 
States using publicly available data from the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. The analysis focuses on exemption rates among children enrolled in 
public kindergarten between 2019 and 2025, with particular attention to 
non-medical exemptions.  

Vaccination requirements for school attendance vary by state. While medical 
exemptions are allowed nationwide, policies regarding religious or philosophical 
exemptions differ across states. Understanding how exemption rates evolve over 
time can help identify potential risks for outbreaks of vaccine-preventable 
diseases.

Recent changes in federal public health leadership, including the appointment 
of Robert F. Kennedy Jr. as Secretary of Health and Human Services, may also 
influence national vaccination recommendations and indirectly affect state-level
policies.


## Research Questions

This project aims to explore the following questions (work in progress):

- How do non-medical vaccination exemption rates vary across U.S. states?

- How have exemption rates evolved between 2019 and 2024?

- What social determinants may have an impact on vaccination hesitancy?

## Context

The considered vaccines or type of exemptions are: 
- Hepatitis B 
- Varicella 
- Polio
- Mumps, Measles, Rubella
- Diphteria Tetanos Pertussis

When Kindergartners are not vaccinated, an exemption must be submitted: 
- Medical Exemption
- Non-Medical Exemption

States have different level of leniency in approving non-medical exemptions. 
The State of Idaho has the highest level of vaccination hesitancy in 2024. 
We will explore the social makeup of the state of Idaho and in a future study explore correlation with 
vaccination hesitancy at the county level. At this time, this data is not available.

## Data

Data come from publicly available reports from the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention on kindergarten immunization coverage.

https://www.cdc.gov/schoolvaxview/data/index.html

The raw CDC contains 8,166 rows and 11 columns.

The data set draws from a very large population: for example: the number of 
children for which Varicella vaccination data was reported in school year 2024-25 is 3,785,644 and the 
average number of children surveyed per geographical area (state) is 77,258. 

We will focus on the following columns:  
Vaccine/Exemption (Categorical)  
Dose (Categorical): values, any exemption, medical exemption, non-medical exemption (religious or philosophical)  
Geography (Categorical): Values used are US States  
Estimate(%) (continuous)  
Population Size (numerical)  
Annual reporting (categorical): Values from 2009-10 to 2024-25 
Year (numerical) extracted from the annual reporting year

We use voter registration data as of January 2025 from the website https://voteidaho.gov/data-and-dashboards/voter-registration-totals/.
The data for Idaho counties poverty rates, median income, language isolation, education levels, population are collected for the year 2019-2023 and are available at
https://hdpulse.nimhd.nih.gov.

Data for Idaho counties surface area is pulled from  
https://opengisdata-idahodeq.opendata.arcgis.com/datasets/idaho-counties/

## Methods


The analysis includes:

 -Exploratory data analysis of exemption rates by state

 -Trend analysis over time

 -Geographic comparisons across states

 -Investigation of potential relationships between exemption rates and disease 
outbreaks

All analyses are conducted in R using RStudio.

## Repository Structure
```
VaccinationHesitancy/  
│
├── analysis  # R scripts for data cleaning and analysis 
        ├──VaccinationHesitancy_US_States
        ├──VaccinationHesitancy_Idaho
        ├──Social-Idaho
├── data      # Raw and processed datasets
        ├──Vaccination_Coverage_and_Exemptions_among_Kindergartners_20260201
        ├──Immunizations_K_Idaho
        ├──2025IdahoVoters 
        ├──IdahoCounties_Education
        ├──IdahoCounties_LanguageIsolation
        ├──IdahoCounties_MedianIncome
        ├──IdahoCounties_Population
        ├──IdahoCounties_Poverty
├── output    # Tables and figures generated by the analysis
        ├──Averages_median_income.vs.Below_poverty_quartiles.png
        ├──Counties_n_Population.png
        ├──Counties_n_VoterRegistration.png
        ├──Hist_median_income.png
        ├──Immunization_Exemptions_by_State.png
        ├──Immunization_Exemptions_Idaho.png
        ├──Immunization_Vaccines_Idaho.png
        ├──Income_n_EducationPovertyLanguage.png
        ├──Income_n_VoterRegistration.png
        ├──table_nonmed_exemptions_by_state.png
├── report    # Markdown report
        ├──VaccinationHesitance_US_States.pdf
        ├──Social-Idaho.pdf
        ├──VaccinationHesitancy_Idaho.pdf
└── README.md # Project overview  

App-1/  # files needed for shiny App
│
├── About.md                   # explanatory text for Shiny App
├── App.R                      # App file
├── Exemptions_Elections.csv   # Vaccination Exemption data and 2024 Elections results per party
├── Idaho_counties.rds         # map file for Idaho Counties
├── Idaho_Counties_sqmiles.csv # Square miles per Idaho County
├── social_Idaho.csv           # Data file for social determinants and Voter Registration
├── us_states.rds              # map file for US states minus AK and HW


```
## Reproducibility

To reproduce the analysis:

Install packages:
- ggplot2
- dplyr
- scales
- stringr
- janitor
- tidyverse
- kableExtra
- car
- patchwork

Clone the repository

Open the project in RStudio

Run the analysis scripts or render the R Markdown report.

## Observations  

The Idaho plot shows that the vaccination exemption rate in Idaho has steadily 
increased from a low of 3.5% since data was first collected in 2009, to reach 
its highest level 15.1% in 2024, which is the last year for which data is available. 

The correlation between median income and below poverty %, republican party affiliation, population age 18-39 and language isolation % appears significant with p values <0.05. \

| Variable                | Effect Size, SD 95% CI|  unit    | P-value  |
|-------------------------|-----------------------|----------|----------|
| below poverty (%)       | -1617 ± 708           |  $/%     |  6.5e-05 |
| republican  (%)         | -313  ± 200           |  $/%     |  0.00406 |
| population 18-39        |  104  ±  89           |  $/100   |  0.02837 |
| language isolation (%)  | -589  ± 540           |  $/%     |  0.03896 |

The adjusted R-squared value is 0.57. 

## Shiny App

https://ac292.shinyapps.io/app-1/

## Notes  

Project developed as part of an MPH data analysis project.

## A.I. Disclosure
ChatGPT was used to find functions and syntax needed for programming goals. AI was also used for debuggging purposes. 